Ch 1: Introduction to Scientific Computing
=====================

[Return to all notes](index.html)

Scientific Computing is

* a field of study in which problem solving is done via writing programs (algorithms and code) to solve the problems.
* a field which requires math or science knowledge to be effective.


Scientific Computing is not

* just writing code
* a substitute for math or science
* a magic bullet to solve any problem

Where is Scientific Computing Used

* making predictions (weather, stock market, traffic, etc.)
* handling and processing gobs of data from scientific experiments
* by individuals testing ideas
* in production software

Ideas needed to do Effective Scientific Computing
------

Scientific Computing is generally used to solve problems in Mathematics and various Science fields.  There are a number of important things that you need to know to solve problems effectively.

* **Find/develop code that runs quickly.**  This all depends on the problems that you are solving.  If a simple program runs that solves your problem and only takes 5 seconds, it's probably fine.  If instead, it takes a few hours to run, you probably want to investigate your solution algorithm.  

* **Find/develop code that uses an appropriate amount of memory.**  Another important aspect is that of memory consumption.  It's not hard to find datasets these days that are 1TB or more in size, however few desktop/laptop machines have more than 16 or 32Gb of RAM, so you can't load the entire file into memory.  Such a dataset would need to be processed in chunks.  

* **Make sure you have known solutions/unit tests**  How do you know that your solution is correct?  It is important to have relatively simple cases that you can test your code on before solving more complex things.  

Examples of Scientific Computing
-------

* Consider a list of 5 cities that you need to visit and return to where you started.  If you know the distances between each pair of cities, what is the most efficient path (in terms of distance or time) that gets you to each city and return.

* Poker is a card game in which certain sets of cards (hands) beat other hands.  Determine the probability (or chance) of getting any particular hand in Poker.  

* Given a dataset of Major League Baseball scores from 2000-2017, find the game with the largest score, most innings played, biggest winning margin, etc.


We will look at these an other problems in this course.


Writing Code for Scientific Computing
-----

Look back at the list of requirements for Scientific Computing projects.  A general rule of thumb is to use a computing language that you know will work well for those tasks.  Typically, most students have learned one or two languages and aren't quite sure which to use.  In most cases it doesn't matter what to use, but for complex problems it will matter.  

One of the best languages for scientific computing has been Matlab over the past 3 or 4 decades.  It is used extensively in engineering firms throughout the world (and the headquarters is in nearby ).  We won't be using Matlab here though.  One of the nice things about taking a class is exploring new languages.  Here we will use [Julia](http://julialang.org), which is a very new language that a lot of people in scientific computing are excited about.  We will give examples using Julia, but the ideas here should be applicable to other languages.   

This is a general getting started chapter with some specifics that can be run in Julia.  To get started with being able to run julia on your own computer, see [getting started in julia](julia.html).  


Mathematical Functions in Julia
-------------

Here's a list of the standard mathematical operations that Julia knows: +,-, * , /,^ (power) as well a large number of functions including: exp (natural exponential);  log (natural log); the trig functions sin, cos, tan, csc, sec, cot; the inverse trig functions asin, acos, atan, acsc, asec, acot, and there is a [listing of all mathematical functions in Julia](http://docs.julialang.org/en/release-0.4/manual/mathematical-operations/#elementary-functions)

Exercise
----

Entering the following

* \\(\frac{4-2}{7-3}\\)
* \\(\sin(\frac{\pi}{4})\\)
* \\(\sin(180^{\circ})\\)
* \\(\ln(7)\\)
* \\({\rm e}^{7}\\)
* \\(2^{\sqrt{3}}\\)

Loops
--------

* For loops

	```
	for i=1:10
	  println(i)
	end
	```

* while loop:
	```
	i=1;
	while i<10
	  println(i)
	  i+=1
	end
	```

More information is at [Julia's manual on loops](http://docs.julialang.org/en/latest/manual/control-flow/#man-loops)

Exercise
----

* Print out all odd positive integers less than 20.

* Find the sum of the first 10 positive integers using a loop.


If statements
-----

Another standard feature of a computing language is that of a if statement.  This allows the code to branch depending on some boolean condition.

```
x=7
if x==7
  println("yeah!")
else
  println("oops!")
end
```

Note: you don't need an else statement.  Also, see [the julia docs on if-ifelse-then statements](http://docs.julialang.org/en/latest/manual/control-flow/#man-conditional-evaluation) for more examples and more details.  

If-then-else Ternary operator
----

A common way to use if-then statements is to assign values.  For example, if we assign `x` the value of 1 if the variable `n` is less than 10 and otherwise set it to 2. We can use the following

```
n=7
if n<10
  x=1
else
  x=2
end
```

We can write this much more compactly as
```
x=n<10?1:2
```

which is read *if n<10, then set x=1 else set x=2*.  

Timing code
----

As we will see the time that a piece of code takes to run is quite important especially as we seek fast algorithms. The easiest way to check the amount of time some code runs is with the @time macro.  Here's an example on how it works:

```
@time begin
    x=1
    for i=1:1000000
        x=x*i   
    end
end
```

which multiplies the first million positive integers together.  If you run this code, you only get the amount of time the code ran and not the result.  A possible result is
```
0.041730 seconds (999.55 k allocations: 15.252 MB)
```

which lists the amount of time taken as well as the memory used and as we will see later, memory allocation can often be where the amount of time is taken.  
