Chapter 3: Data Types
=============

[Return to all notes](index.html)


Numeric Types
-------------

One of the first things that is important is a knowledge of how computers store numbers and other mathematical objects.  You should review details of integers and floating point numbers in your Introduction to Computer Science text or the following  wikipedia pages for further information:

* [wikipedia's page on integers](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integer_(computer_science\))
* [wikipedia's page on floating point numbers](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Floating_point_numbers)


Julia's standard numbers and mathematical objects
----------------

Since we are primarily using Julia in this class, there are a few extensions of the standard types of mathematical numbers.  Specifically, rational numbers and complex numbers.  
Julia has built-in number and other mathematical data types including those listed above in various sizes as well as rational numbers, matrices, and complex numbers.  The following are links to the Julia documentation for

* [integers](http://docs.julialang.org/en/latest/manual/integers-and-floating-point-numbers/)
* [floating point](http://docs.julialang.org/en/latest/manual/integers-and-floating-point-numbers/)
* [rational numbers](http://docs.julialang.org/en/latest/manual/complex-and-rational-numbers/)
* [complex numbers](http://docs.julialang.org/en/latest/manual/complex-and-rational-numbers/)

Size of numbers
------------

Storing a single number on a computer takes certain amount of memory.  There are a lot of specifics in the links above or in your Computer Science text, but in short there are different types of integer and floating point numbers.  In Julia, there are 8, 16, 32, 64, 128 bit versions of integer (both signed and unsigned) and 16, 32 and 64 bit floating point numbers.  For example, to set the number 1 as a 16 bit signed integer, type
```
Int8(1)
```

and to determine the type of this (or anything), type `typeof(ans)` and it returns `Int8`.  If you just enter `x=5` and then `typeof(5)` you should get `Int64` (or maybe `Int32` if you're using a 32-bit machine )

If you type `typeof(3.0)` you will probably get `Float64`, but possibly `Float32`.  

Scientific Notation
------

Recall that any number written in decimal form with only a finite number of digits can be written in scientific notation that is in the form:
\\[ 	a \times 10^b \\]
where \\(1<|a|<10\\) and \\(b\\) is an integer.  For example \\(4003.23\\) can be written as \\(4.00323 \times 10^3\\), so \\(a=4.00323\\) and \\(b=3\\).

In this form the number \\(a\\)is often called the **significand** or **mantissa** and the number \\(b\\) is **exponent**.  This example has the base 10, however other bases are common (generally base 2).   

One major advantage to using numbers in this form is the simple multiplication and division.  Consider multiplying \\(x=3.4 \times 10^2\\) and \\(y=-4.7 \times 10^{-3}\\).  Using properties of exponentials we get
\\[	xy = (3.4)(-4.7) \times 10^{2-3} = -15.98 \times 10^{-1}\\]
and typically we would like to put this back into scientific notation by shifting the exponent so \\(xy=-1.598 \times 10^{0}\\).

Division can be done in a similar manner and perhaps surprisingly, addition and subtraction are more difficult due to the fact that the exponents of the two numbers need to be equal before adding and subtracting.

Binary Representation of integers
-------

Since ultimately all numbers are stored as binary, it may be helpful to know how that number is stored.  The `bits` function will do this.  If `x=Int8(3)`, and typing `bits(x)` returns `"00000011"`, where 1) notice that there are in fact 8 bits used and 2) this is 3 in binary.  


Floating Point Numbers of a given size
-----

The reason for using floating point numbers in calculations is twofold.  First, there is a finite size of storage for a number and secondly, routines for performing operations on floating-point numbers are fast and usually encoded on a computer chip.  

Consider a floating point of a given size, say 64 bits generally called a *double precision floating point number*.  The first bit is generally used for the sign, the next 11 are the exponent and the final 52 bits store the mantissa.  A floating point number has two limitations and that is the precision (how many digits that can be stored) and the magnitude (the largest number).  Double precision numbers are store in binary and converted to decimal with the form:
\\[
(-1)^s 2^{c-1023}(1+f)
\\]
where $s$ is the sign $c$ is the exponent and $f$ stores the mantissa.  For example, consider the following number:
\\[
0\;10000000101\;0111011010000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
\\]
where spaces separate out $s$, $c$ and $f$.  Converting $c$ to decimal:
\\[
c = 1 \cdot 2^{10} + 0 \cdot 2^9 + \cdots + 1 \cdot 2^2 + 0 \cdot 2^1 + 1 \cdot 2^0 = 1029
\\]
The mantissa is calculated in the following way

\\[
f = 0 \cdot \biggl(\frac{1}{2}\biggr)^1 + 1 \cdot \biggl(\frac{1}{2}\biggr)^2 + 1 \cdot \biggl(\frac{1}{2}\biggr)^3 + 1 \cdot \biggl(\frac{1}{2}\biggr)^4 + 0 \cdot \biggl(\frac{1}{2}\biggr)^5 + 1 \cdot \biggl(\frac{1}{2}\biggr)^6  \\
\qquad + 1 \cdot \biggl(\frac{1}{2}\biggr)^7 + 0 \cdot \biggl(\frac{1}{2}\biggr)^8 + 1 \cdot \biggl(\frac{1}{2}\biggr)^9 = \frac{237}{512}
\\]
and thus the floating point number is:
\\[
(-1)^0 2^{1029-1023} \biggl(1+\frac{237}{512}\biggr) = 93.625
\\]

The double precision number system falls into a class of number systems that we can commonly call floating-point number systems.

We can use the `bits` function in julia to find the binary representation.  Notice that
```
bits(93.625)
```

returns a string that is the binary representation above.

Exercise
-----

* Play with other integers in 8-bit and see the representation.
* How are negative numbers stored?
* Examine other sizes of integers.
* Examine the Unsigned versions of the integers.
* Play with some floats of size 16, 32 or 64.  


BigInts and BigFloats
------

As we saw in the previous chapter, sometimes you'll run out of numbers (on the integer side) or precious when using a float.  This is where `BigInt`s and `BigFloats` come in handy.  A `BigInt` will grow as needed.  Here's an example.  If you find powers of 10 as in
```
[10^i for i=10:20]
```

one will see that up to $10^{18}$, you get a reasonable number and then what happens?   From 18 to 19 there's a overflow error, however Julia does not report it as such by default.  The following will report the overflow error and nearly does the same thing:
```
x=10^10
for i=1:20
    println(x)
    x=Base.checked_mul(x,10)
end
```

Now if we do the following using BigInts:

```
[big(10)^i for i=10:20]
```

then it gives what we expect.  

### BigFloats

Sometimes you may want more precision than a Float64 gives.  For example, what if you want to calculate $\pi$ to 100 digits.[^fn: And in fact, I calculated $\pi$ to about 100,000 digits for a talk in Spring 2016 using Julia]  Although I won't go through that, but we can generate a big float with value 1.0 using `x=big(1.0)` enter this in and you will get:
```
1.000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
```

and you can count the number of zeros or you can determine the precision using `precision(x)` and this returns 256, which is the number of bits and it has 4 times the precision of `Float64`, which generally has about 16 decimal digits of accuracy, so this would have about 64 decimal digits.  

You can get more precision using the `setprecision` function.  For example:
```
setprecision(2^10)
```
returns 1024 (or each number is stored in 128 bytes of memory).  Then typing `big(1.0)` returns:
```
1.000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
```

which has about 250 decimal digits of accuracy.  

### Using BigFloats and BigInts

There's a few things to notes about using BigInts and BigFloats.  

* You may need to make sure that all calculations are done using the number of bits desired.  For example:
  ```
  big(10^20)
  ```

  returns `7766279631452241920` which makes absolutely no sense.  However,
  ```
  big(10)^20
  ```

  returns what is expected.   Why?

* It is generally slower to use BigInts and BigFloats than the 64-bit integers.  So only use BigInts and BigFloats if you need the extra precision.


### Exercise


To check the latter, try writing a factorial function using `BigInt` test the time between the nonBig one and the Big one.


## Rational numbers

A rational number is the ratio of integers and more commonly called a fraction.  Julia (unlike many other general computing languages) has rational numbers built-in.  To put in a ratio, enter a `//` to separate the numerator and denominator. For example:
```
2//3
4//7
178//11
-1//2
```

are examples of rational numbers.  One advantage that they have is that the numerator and denominator are stored as integers (64-bit by default) and are not subject to round-off errors that floating points are.  The standard operations $+,-,\cdot,\div$


### Exercise

Perform the following operations involving rationals in Julia:

* $\frac{1}{2} + \frac{2}{3}$
* $\frac{1}{2} - \frac{2}{3}$
* $\frac{2}{3} \cdot \frac{3}{5}$
* $\frac{2}{3} \div \frac{3}{5}$

### Other Operations with Rationals

As long as you stay in the basic operations, the result will be a rational.  However, may other operations are not.  For example `sin(1//2)` will return a floating-point number.  `(2//3)^3` will return a rational but `(2//3)^(1//2)` will return a float (the square root of 2/3).
