Chapter 6: Loading Packages
========

[Return to all notes](index.html)

As with many software packages, additional functionality is available in other libraries or packages. If you take a look at [https://juliaobserver.com](Julia's Package Listing) there are about 2000 packages (as of Fall 2018).  Clicking on any of the package names will give additional information about the package including documentation (hopefully).

If you don't have a package installed and try to use it, like:
```
using Primes
```

You will get an error that it isn't installed.  You can add the package by
```
using Pkg
Pkg.add("Primes")
```

and after fetching the package, rerunning
```
using Primes
```

should no longer give an error.  Then, for example, try
```
isprime(17)
```

which returns true because 17 is a prime number.   This is a nondeterministic function that determines if a number is true. The documentation for the Primes package is at  [https://github.com/JuliaMath/Primes.jl](https://github.com/JuliaMath/Primes.jl) and demonstrates 4 commands including `isprime` and `factor` which returns all prime factors (and the order).


A few other packages that we have seen or will see:

* IJulia -- provides the browser interface to Julia.  You are probably already using this.
* ForwardDiff -- does Automatic Differentiation (see Chapter 8)
* Plots -- A plotting packages (See Chapter 11)
* GR -- A backend to the Plots package.
* PlotlyJS -- Another nice backend to the Plots package.
* DataFrames -- a way to nicely handle datasets generally loaded from external files.

[Chapter 14](ch14.html) will show how to create our own packages also called a module.


## Managing Packages in Julia

Although we can use the `Pkg` package to handle packages, this section will use the terminal REPL to handle any non-standard packages.  Additional documentation on this is given in [https://docs.julialang.org/en/latest/stdlib/Pkg/](Julia's package manager help pages)  First, open up a terminal version of julia (generally by opening the application that you downloaded). You will get:

```
              _
   _      _ _(_)_      |  Documentation: https://docs.julialang.org
  (_)    | (_) (_)     |
  _ _   _| |_  __ _    |  Type "?" for help, "]?" for Pkg help.
  | | | | | | |/ _` |  |
  | | |_| | | | (_| |  |  Version 1.0.0 (2018-08-08)
 _/ |\__'_|_|_|\__'_|  |  Official https://julialang.org/ release
|__/                   |

```
or similar and then
```
julia>
```

which means we're ready to handle julia commands. If we type `]`, then the prompt turns into:
```
(v1.0) pkg>
```

There are a number of commands that we will cover here:

* add
* remove (rm)
* develop (dev)
* status
* update (up)
* test
* build
* precompile


### Adding a package

In the package command line, type `add` *package_name* to add the package. For example, to add the `ForwardDff` package:
```
add ForwardDiff
```

and it is not installed, you will get something like:
```
Updating registry at `~/.julia/registries/General`
  Updating git-repo `https://github.com/JuliaRegistries/General.git`
  Updating `~/.julia/environments/v1.0/Project.toml`
  [f6369f11] + ForwardDiff v0.9.0
  Updating `~/.julia/environments/v1.0/Manifest.toml`
  [9e28174c] + BinDeps v0.8.10
  [bbf7d656] + CommonSubexpressions v0.2.0
  [163ba53b] + DiffResults v0.0.3
  [b552c78f] + DiffRules v0.0.7
  [f6369f11] + ForwardDiff v0.9.0
  [77ba4419] + NaNMath v0.3.2
  [276daf66] + SpecialFunctions v0.7.0
  [90137ffa] + StaticArrays v0.8.3
```


A few things to note:  

* The line after the 2nd `Updating` line is the package (and version) that you are installing.
* All of the lines after the 3rd `Updating` line is all of the packages that this depends on.
* The + sign means that the package is being added.  

If you want to add multiple packages at the same time, say packages A, B and C, type `add A B C`.  You can also add particular versions of a package (often for testing or to avoid a bug). For example, if you want version 0.3.0 of `ForwardDiff` type:
```
add ForwardDiff@0.3.0
```

You will then get info on the dependencies on that version.


### Package Status

The `status` command (or `st`) will just list all of the main packages installed.  For example,

```
Status `~/.julia/environments/v1.0/Project.toml`
[c52e3926] Atom v0.7.6
[336ed68f] CSV v0.3.1
[a93c6f00] DataFrames v0.13.1
[f6369f11] ForwardDiff v0.9.0
[7073ff75] IJulia v1.12.0
[e5e0dc1b] Juno v0.5.3
[1a8c2f83] Query v0.10.0
```

and note that these are just the packages added by the `add` command, not all of the dependencies. If you want all of the dependencies as well, type `st --manifest` and I get a huge list of packages.

### Removing a Package

You can remove a package by typing `remove` or `rm` then the package name.  If I want to remove the `ForwardDiff` package, then

```
remove ForwardDiff
```

we get the following:
```
Updating `~/.julia/environments/v1.0/Project.toml`
 [f6369f11] - ForwardDiff v0.3.0
 Updating `~/.julia/environments/v1.0/Manifest.toml`
 [49dc2e85] - Calculus v0.4.1
 [c5cfe0b6] - DiffBase v0.2.0
 [f6369f11] - ForwardDiff v0.3.0
 [77ba4419] - NaNMath v0.3.2
```

Note:

* The `rm` command removes the package from the list of available packages, but doesn't remove them from your harddrive.
* If you want to see everything installed, navigate to the `~/.julia/packages` directory, which is where they are stored.

### Updating packages

If you type `update` or `up` you will update all of the installed packages (and dependencies). For example:
```
Updating `~/.julia/environments/v1.0/Project.toml`
 [7073ff75] ↑ IJulia v1.11.1 ⇒ v1.12.0
 Updating `~/.julia/environments/v1.0/Manifest.toml`
 [7073ff75] ↑ IJulia v1.11.1 ⇒ v1.12.0
 [b85f4697] ↑ SoftGlobalScope v1.0.5 ⇒ v1.0.7
 [5e66a065] ↑ TableShowUtils v0.1.1 ⇒ v0.2.0
```

and all updates will be with an ↑. If you only want to update a single package, type the name after `update`.

### Building Packages

Generally a package is built after it is installed.  Building a package might include running code (or unpacking files) after it is installed.  Sometimes if things get wonky, rebuilding is a good thing to do.  

```
build
```

or if you only want say `IJulia` built,

```
build IJulia
```

####Precompiling packages

When a package is used, often it requests to be compiled.  For example, when `using Primes`, then following is shown:
```
[ Info: Precompiling Primes [27ebfcd6-29c5-5fa9-bf4b-fb8fc14df3ae]
```

and basically some code is compiled beforehand, generally to speed up code.  You can precompile all code with
```
precompile
```

and it may take a while, but you won't have to wait, when you load the package with the `using` command.

### Testing a Packages

To test a packge, say the `ForwardDiff` package, then
```
test ForwardDiff
```

It list all of the dependencies first, and then runs a number of tests (and we will show how to write tests soon) and timing information.  After a while, it finishes sucessfully.
