Chapter 7: Arrays
========

[Return to all notes](index.html)

Arrays are a fundamental data structure for nearly every computer language and it is a crucial for scientific computing therefore it is important for julia.  It is recommended to read the [julia documentation on arrays](http://docs.julialang.org/en/release-0.5/manual/arrays/)

In short an array is a collection of data of (typically) the same type under the same name.  We have seen arrays before.  For example, if we say
```
arr = [1,2,3]
```

Then we get a 1-dimensional array of length 3.  Note that when returned, julia says `3-element Array{Int64,1}:` which means

* it is length 3 (since it is a 3-element)
* The internal type is Int64
* it is 1-dimensional, because the 1 as the second element in the {}.  

There are some basic functions that tell us some information:

* `length(arr)` returns 3, the length.
* `eltype(arr)` returns `Int64`, the type of the elements in the array.

### Contructing arrays

We can create arrays in many ways.  As seen above, the line
```
arr=[1,2,3]
```

creates a 1-D array of length 3.  If we know the element, a 2D array can be made like:
```
arr2=[1 2 3; 4 5 6]
```

and this returns:
```
2×3 Array{Int64,2}:
 1  2  3
 4  6  7
```

and note that there is now a 2 after the comma in the {}.  This indicates it is a 2 dimensional array.  

 The following built-in functions are also helpful:

* `zeros(type,dims...)` makes an array of all zeros with datatype `type` and given dimensions.  For example,
  ```zeros(Integer,4,6)
  ```

    returns an array with 4 rows and 6 columns with integer types.

* `ones(type,dims...)` is similar to `zeros` except it is filled with 1s.

* `rand(dims...)` makes a random array of floating points (uniformly distributed between 0 and 1).  


Comprehensions
-------

If we know the form of an array element, we can use what is called a comphrension to construct it in a compact manner.  For example, a 1D array with the elements 1,-1,1,-1,1,-1 can be made:

```
[(-1)^n for n=0:7]
```

and the following:
```
[m+n for n=1:8,m=1:8]
```

makes an 8 by 8 matrix where each element is the sum of the row and column number.

Accessing elements of an array
------

Let
```
x=[1 2 3]
```

to access the 2nd element, we type `x[2]`.  To get an array of the last two elements, type
```
x[2:3]
```

or
```
x[2:end]
```

where `end` will automatically fill with the index of the last element.  

Let
```
A=[1 2 3; 4 5 6]
```

to access the 1st row, 3rd column, type `A[1,3]`.  If you want the subarray of both rows and the first and 3rd column, type:
```
A[1:2,[1,3]]
```

returns the matrix `[1 3; 4 6]`.  There is a bunch of different ways to return submatrices.  See [indexing in Julia matrices documentation](http://docs.julialang.org/en/release-0.5/manual/arrays/#indexing) for more information.

Common Operations on Matrices
-------

There are a number of operations on matrices.  For each `+` and `-` adds and subtracts two elements (element by element).  For example if
```
A=[1 2 3; 4 5 6]
```

and
```
B=[1 3 5; 2 4 6]
```

then `A+B` returns the matrix:
$$\left[\begin{array}{ccc} 2 & 5 & 8 \newline 6 & 9 & 12 \end{array} \right]$$
and `B-A` returns
$$\left[\begin{array}{ccc} 0 & 1 & 2 \newline -2 & -1 & 0  \end{array} \right]$$

The matrix product does not exist between A and B, and if you try `A*B`, you get:
```
LoadError: DimensionMismatch("matrix A has dimensions (2,3), matrix B has dimensions (2,3)")
```

because the number of columns of A does not equal the number of rows of B.  If you need element-by-element multiplication, then `A.*B` returns
$$\left[\begin{array}{ccc} 1 & 6 &   15 \newline
 8 & 20 & 36  \end{array} \right]$$. If you have
 `C=[3 5; -2 0]`

 Then `A*C` returns
 $$\left[\begin{array}{ccc} 23 & 31 & 39 \newline
-2 & -4 & -6 \end{array} \right]$$.
where matrix-matrix algebra from linear algebra was used.  

There is also matrix *division* in julia which is used to solve linear systems.  For example if
`y=[16;6]`
then `C\Y` solves the linear system `CX=Y` for X.  It returns the vector
$$ \left[\begin{array}-3.0\newline 5.0\end{array}\right]$$

The documentation also lists all of the *vectorized* methods that work elementwise on a matrix.  For example, `sqrt(A)` returns a matrix with the square root of each number.

Mapping Elements in an array
------------

A wonderful function in julia and many other languages is one that takes an array and returns an array with each element related to the first.  For example, if we have an array from
```
list=collect(1:5)
```

and we want an array of the square of each of these, then typing
```
map(x->x^2,list)
```

returns the square of each element.  (Note: if you just wanted an array of the squares, `[i^2 for i=1:5]` is a simpler way to do this.)

### Exercise

* use the `map` function on `list` to give the array `[3,5,7,9,11]`.
* use the `map` function on `list` to give the array `[1,0,-1,0,1]`.

Reducing an array
----

If you want to determine a single number (or other type) from an array, then `reduce` and its variants can often be used.  For example, if we have the matrix:
```
A=collect(1:3:16)
```

then
```
reduce(+,0,A)
```

returns 51, which is just the sum of the elements.  What this does is uses the first operator to reduce the first 2 elements of the array to a number, then continues.  

Note: you can just use `sum(A)` for this which is optimized.  

### Exercise

* What does `reduce(string,"",["J","u","l","i","a"])` do?


The `mapreduce` function
-----

The [mapreduce](http://docs.julialang.org/en/release-0.5/stdlib/collections/#Base.mapreduce) function is perhaps more helpful than `reduce`.  For example, if we want to sum the squares of each number in an array, then `mapreduce` can do this easily.

```
mapreduce(x->x^2,+,0,[1 2 3])
```

is a short-hand way to do \\(1^2+2^2+3^2=14\\)


### return to `is_happy`

The `is_happy` function we wrote was fairly short, but using `mapreduce` allows us to go shorter.  The following is another way:

```
function is_happy(n::Integer)
    n==1?true:n==4?false:is_happy(mapreduce(x->x^2,+,0,split_digits(n)))
end
```

`Filter`-ing element from an array
------

If we want to print out all of the happy numbers less than 101, we can write a nice loop and check if each is happy.  However, the following does it using the `filter` command:
```
filter(is_happy,collect(1:100))
```

produces a list of 20 numbers that are happy.  
