Chapter 10: Arrays
========

[Return to all notes](index.html)

Arrays are a fundamental data structure for nearly every computer language and it is a crucial for scientific computing therefore it is important for julia.  It is recommended to read the [julia documentation on arrays](http://docs.julialang.org/en//manual/arrays/)

In short an array is a collection of data of (typically) the same type under the same name.  We have seen arrays before.  For example, if we say
```
arr = [1,2,3]
```

Then we get a 1-dimensional array of length 3.  Note that when returned, julia says `3-element Array{Int64,1}:` which means

* it is length 3 (since it is a 3-element)
* The internal type is Int64
* it is 1-dimensional, because the 1 as the second element in the {}.  

There are some basic functions that tell us some information:

* `length(arr)` returns 3, the length.
* `eltype(arr)` returns `Int64`, the type of the elements in the array.

### Constructing arrays

We can create arrays in many ways.  As seen above, the line
```
arr=[1,2,3]
```

creates a 1-D array of length 3.  If we know the element, a 2D array can be made like:
```
arr2=[1 2 3; 4 5 6]
```

and this returns:
```
2×3 Array{Int64,2}:
 1  2  3
 4  6  7
```

and note that there is now a 2 after the comma in the {}.  This indicates it is a 2 dimensional array.  

 The following built-in functions are also helpful:

* `zeros(type,dims...)` makes an array of all zeros with datatype `type` and given dimensions.  For example,
  ```
  zeros(Integer,4,6)
  ```

    returns an array with 4 rows and 6 columns with integer types.

* `ones(type,dims...)` is similar to `zeros` except it is filled with 1s.

* `rand(dims...)` makes a random array of floating points (uniformly distributed between 0 and 1).  


Comprehensions
-------

If we know the form of an array element, we can use what is called a comphrension to construct it in a compact manner.  For example, a 1D array with the elements 1,-1,1,-1,1,-1 can be made:

```
[(-1)^n for n=0:7]
```

and the following:
```
[m+n for n=1:8,m=1:8]
```

makes an 8 by 8 matrix where each element is the sum of the row and column number.

Accessing elements of an array
------

Let
```
x=collect(1:7)
```

which is the vector of numbers 1,2 to 7.  To access the 2nd element, we type `x[2]`.  To get an array of the middle 3 elements, type
```
x[3:5]
```

or
```
x[3:end-2]
```

where `end` will automatically fill with the index of the last element.  

Let
```
A=[i+j for i=1:4,j=1:5]
```

to access the 1st row, 3rd column, type `A[1,3]`.  If you want the subarray of the first and 3rd and 5th columns and all rows type:
```
A[:,1:2:5]
```

returns the matrix
```
2  4  6
3  5  7
4  6  8
5  7  9
```

where the : in the first slot means all rows and `1:2:5` are the columns 1, 3 and 5.  

If we want the first 2 rows and then shuffle the 2,3 and 5th columns in the order 5,3,2 type
```
A[1:2,[5,3,2]]
```

to get
```
6  4  3
7  5  4
```

.  There is a bunch of different ways to return submatrices.  See [indexing in Julia matrices documentation](http://docs.julialang.org/en/release-0.5/manual/arrays/#indexing) for more information.

Common Operations on Matrices
-------

There are a number of operations on matrices.  For each `+` and `-` adds and subtracts two elements (element by element).  For example if
```
A=[1 2 3; 4 5 6]
```

and
```
B=[1 3 5; 2 4 6]
```

then `A+B` returns the matrix:

$$\left[\begin{array}{ccc} 2 & 5 & 8 \newline 6 & 9 & 12 \end{array} \right]$$

and `B-A` returns
$$\left[\begin{array}{ccc} 0 & 1 & 2 \newline -2 & -1 & 0  \end{array} \right]$$

The matrix product does not exist between A and B, and if you try `A*B`, you get:
```
DimensionMismatch("matrix A has dimensions (2,3), matrix B has dimensions (2,3)")
```

because the number of columns of A does not equal the number of rows of B.  If you need element-by-element multiplication, then `A.*B` returns
$$\left[\begin{array}{ccc} 1 & 6 &   15 \newline
 8 & 20 & 36  \end{array} \right].$$

 If you have
 `C=[4  3  1; 0  0  4; 4  1  1]`

 Then `A*C` returns
 $$\left[\begin{array}{ccc} 16 &  6 & 12 \newline
40  & 18 & 30 \end{array} \right].$$

where matrix-matrix multiplication from linear algebra was used.  

There is also matrix *division* in julia which is used to solve linear systems.  For example if
`y=[16;6]`
then `C\Y` solves the linear system `CX=Y` for X.  It returns the vector
$$ \left[\begin{array}-3.0\newline 5.0\end{array}\right]$$

Element by Element Operations
-------

Many methods exist to simplify a *vectorized* method that returns the operation applied element by element to the matrix.  To do this, most operations have a `.` variety (we saw this above with the `.*` operation above) To take the square root of every number in the matrix `A`, we can enter `sqrt.(A)` which returns:
```
1.0  1.41421  1.73205
 2.0  2.23607  2.44949
```

### Exercises
Let `A=[1,2; 3,4]` and `B=[1,-1;-1,1]`.
1.  Explain the results of
  * `A^2`
  * `A.^2`
  * `A*B`
  * `A.*B`

2. Find the sin of every number in `A`.


Other Operations on Arrays
-----

There are also other operations on arrays.  For example, summing all elements in an array is just the `sum` functions. For example:

```
sum(1:10)
```

returns 55.  There are also the `min`, `max` and `prod` functions, with the last one, the product of elements.

```
prod([1,3,5,7])
```

and notice that use the `prod` function can simply get us the double factorial function.
```
function dfact(n)
    return mod(n,2)==1?prod(1:2:n):prod(2:2:n)
end
```

Push, Pop and Splice
-------

We have already seen `push!` which appends an element to an array.  Recall that if `A=collect(1:5)` then
```
push!(A,7)
```

returns `A` which is now the array `[1,2,3,4,5,7]`.  And multiple values can  be pushed.
```
push!(A,8,9,10,100)
```

results in the array `[1,2,3,4,5,7,8,9,10,100]`.  If we want to concatenate two arrays, we should use the `append!` command.  For example:
```
append!([1,2,3],[4,5,6])
```

returns the array `[1,2,3,4,5,6]`

### pop!

To get an element off of the end of the array, we can use `pop!`.  If `A=collect(1:5)`, then
```
pop!(A)
```

returns 5.

### Push, pop and Stacks

A [stack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stack_%28abstract_data_type%29) is a data structure that acts like a stack of paper.  You put things on top of them and remove them from the top.  The commands `push!` and `pop!` work with arrays to act like a stack.  

### splice!

The `splice!` function is a [Swiss Army knife](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swiss_Army_knife) for arrays.  It can take an array, pull elements out and put elements in.

To remove elements out of the array. If `A=collect(1:2:9)` then
```
splice!(A,4)
```

removes and returns the 4th element which is 7.  Also, the array `A` is the original array without the 7 or  `[1,3,5,9]`.

If we let `A=collect(1:2:11)`, then
```
splice!(A,3:5)
```

removes and returns the 3rd, 4th and 5th elements of `A` (or `[3,5,7]`) and `A` is now the vector `[1,3,11]`

Now, as I mentioned, `splice!` is the swiss army knife, because it doesn't even more!! (Now, how much would you pay?).  We can use it to replace elements into the center of an array.

If `A=collect(1:2:11)`, then
```
splice!(A,3,4)
```

replaces the 3rd position with the number 4.  Note: the 3rd element is returned.  This is 5.   

If `A=collect(1:2:11)`, then replacing the 3rd element with `[-1,-2,-3]` by
```
splice!(A,3,[-1,-2,-3])
```

returns `[1,3,-1,-2,-3,7,9,11]` and again 5 is returned.  


To insert a number without removing one, we can also use `splice!`.  If `A=collect(1:2:11)` and we want to insert `[-1,-2,-3]` at element 3 and shift the rest down:
```
splice!(A,3:2,[-1,-2,-3])
```

returns a 0-length array and `A=[1,3,-1,-2,-3,5,7,9,11]`.


### `filter`ing elements

A very handle array method, is `filter` which takes an array and returns only the elements that satisfy some condition.

If `A=collect(1:20)`, then

```
filter(n->n%2==0,A)
```

returns all elements that satisfy that the mod 2 is 0 (or even numbers).

### removing duplicates with `unique`

Another handy function is the `unique` function that takes an array and returns only the unique elements.

If `A=[1,2,3,2,3,4,3,4,5,4,3,2,1]` then
```
unique(A)
```

returns `[1,2,3,4,5]`.  
