
Chapter 13: Creating New Data Types in Julia
=====

[Return to all notes](../index.html)


We will start to look at playing cards (poker) probabilities below.  Before that, let's look at a different datatype in Julia that allows us to store more that one variable together.  This is often called a composite type or a struct (from C) and similar to an object however you can't have a function as a member of the type.

###Card datatype

For our playing card example, a card has a rank (1 to 13 corresponding to Ace, 2, through 10, J, Q, K) and a suit (1 to 4 corresponding to the suits  "spades", "diamonds", "hearts", "clubs"), which we define

```
ranks = ["A","2","3","4","5","6","7","8","9","T","J","Q","K"];
suits = ["\u2660","\u2661","\u2662","\u2663"]
```

where the suits are the unicode characters for the suits.   See [the julia documentation on unicode](http://docs.julialang.org/en/latest/manual/unicode-input/).

We can define this using a Julia [composite type.](http://docs.julialang.org/en/latest/manual/types/#composite-types).

```
struct Card
    rank::Integer
    suit::Integer
end
```

and if we type
```
c = Card(3,2)
```

this will create a card of rank 3 and suit 2 (spades). To access the fields of the type, we use dot notation.  For example `c.rank` will return 3 and `c.suit` will return 2.  

Although it's not very interesting to have the card `c` just give the rank and suit, so we will make the output much more interesting.  To do this we will define Base.show for our type.  To do this, we
```
Base.show(io::IO, c::Card) =  print(io, string(ranks[c.rank],suits[c.suit]))
```

where the arguments of `Base.show` should be of type `IO` and then a print should be called as above.  Note: this is different than just a println within a function, which is highly discouraged.  This function is called whenever a card type is displayed.  So if one types `c`, you should now get `3♡`.


When we evaluate `Card(3,2)` we  call a special function called a constructor, which creates an instance of the type.  Although Julia creates the basic constructor--that is the one that fills the fields of the type, we may want another constructor that will take an integer between 1 and 52 and returns the appropriate card.  The following example will do this.

```
struct Card
    rank::Int
    suit::Int
    Card(r::Int,s::Int)=new(r,s)
    Card(i::Int) = i<1||i>52 ? throw(ArgumentError("The argument must be an integer between 1 and 52"))     
        : i%13==0 ? new(13,div(i,13)) : new(i%13,div(i,13)+1)
end
```

Notice that there is a function `new` that is called.  The first constructor is the default constructor.  If a second one is made (as is in this example), you need to explicitly create it.  See [additional information about constructors in the Julia Documentation](https://docs.julialang.org/en/latest/manual/constructors/#man-constructors-1).

You will need to restart the kernel and replace the previous struct with this one because structs are non-mutable.  

The second constructor will create a card from a number between 1 and 52 (and throw an error if it is not in this range).  We can now create a card from an integer.  For example:
```
c1=Card(45)
```


Since a Hand is also helpful in playing card games, we will define a hand in the following way:
```
struct Hand
    cards::Array{Card,1}
end
```

which is just an array of cards.  (Note: there is nothing here that specifies that the Hand has to be 5 cards, but that could be included by doing some error checking in the constructor)


Let's create a Hand by typing
```
h=Hand([Card(2,3),Card(12,1),Card(10,1),Card(10,4),Card(5,2)])
```

and again, since this looks a bit ugly, we can define a Base.show method for a hand:
```
Base.show(io::IO,h::Hand) = print(io, string("[",join(h.cards,", "),"]"))
```
returns "2♢,Q♠,T♠,T♣,5♡"

We now have some nice additional types, however, we now want to do something interesting with them.


###Find Probabilities of Poker Hands

Let's actually look at determining if a hand is a particular poker hand.  Some of them are fairly difficult to test for. Let's first try a full house, which is a hand of 5 cards, 2 of which have the same rank and 3 of which have the same rank.  The two ranks are not the same. For more information about poker hands, see the [Wikipedia page on Poker Hands](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_poker_hands).

A template for the `is_full_house` function is as follows.  

```
function is_full_house(h::Hand)

end
```

Once we have the function written, we should test it on a few known and unknown full house hands.  Try testing:

```
fh1= Hand(Card[Card(4,1),Card(4,3),Card(4,4),Card(7,1),Card(7,2)])
```

```
fh2=Hand([Card(4,1),Card(4,3),Card(7,4),Card(7,1),Card(7,2)])
```

and

```
fh3=Hand([Card(2,1),Card(4,3),Card(4,4),Card(7,1),Card(7,2)])
```

And note that the first 2 are full house hands and the last is not.

#### Running a Simulation

Now, let's perform a Monte Carlo simulation on a large number of poker hands and test if this gives the result we want:

```
deck=collect(1:52) # creates the array [1,2,3,...,52]
numhands=0
trials = 100_000
for i=1:trials
    shuffle!(deck)
    h = Hand(map(Card,deck[1:5]))  # creates a hand back on the first five cards of the deck
    if(is_full_house(h))
        numhands+=1
    end
end
numhands/trials
```

will create 100,000 poker hands and test how many are full house.  It would be helpful to put this in a function.  We will do this and put all of these in a package together in the next chapter.



### Parametric Types

Let’s say that we wish to create a function that does basically the same thing for different types of arguments. Let's look at an example.  Consider the basic type of Polynomial.  

```
struct Polynomial{T}
  coeffs::Vector{T}
end
```

This definition allows us to create a polynomial with coefficient of any type:

```
poly1=Polynomial([1,2,3])
```

And if the result is: `Polynomial{Int64}([1, 2, 3])`.  It would be nice if the result looked like a polynomial.  In this case, we can use the `show` command.  

```
function Base.show(stream::IO, p::Polynomial)
  str = ""
  for i = 1:length(p.coeffs)
      str = string(str,p.coeffs[i],"x^",i-1,i<length(p.coeffs)?"+":"")
  end
  show(stream, str)
end
```

and another nice thing that we'd like to do is an add command.  However, if we do:
```
function +(p1::Polynomial{T},p2::Polynomial{S}) where {T <: Number, S <: Number}
  Polynomial(p1.coeffs+p2.coeffs)
end
```

we get the error:
```
error in method definition: function Base.+ must be explicitly imported to be extended
```

so we need to do:
```
import Base.+
```

and then we can rerun the function above.  


which will allow us to add two polynomials and the information after the where says that the types of polynomials should be subsets of `Number` and not for example a string.   

To show how to add, let
```
poly2 = Polynomial([2,3,4])
```

then `poly1+poly2` returns:
```
3x^0+5x^1+7x^2
```

### Polynomial with string coefficients?

What if we have Strings as coefficients?

```
poly3 = Polynomial(["a","b","c"])
```

returns
```
ax^0+bx^1+cx^2
```

Note that there is no problem with this, but if we try to add `poly1` and `poly3` there will be an error:
```
MethodError: no method matching +(::Polynomial{Int64}, ::Polynomial{String})
```
