More to Maple than meets the eye
==========

So far, we have been using Maple for doing and showing mathematics.  We've been simplify expressions, solving equations and producing plots.  In this chapter, we go beyond the basics of Maple a bit deeper to show that Maple is a powerful computing environment and if you take advantage of the power.  

We take a step back from doing mathematics with Maple and explore some of the details of how Maple works and look at the structure of Maple commands.  


Variables and the Variable Browser
-----

As we saw earlier, we can store anything in a variable using the `varname:=obj` syntax where `varname` is any variable name (it can't start with a number) and `obj` is any Maple object (expression, function, plot, etc.). 

You can think of variables as on a grid on a white board with a column for the name and a column for the object.  For example, let's say you have `f:=x^2`.  Anytime you type in `f` in an expression, Maple will look up the value of the variable.

If later in your Maple document, you type `f:=x^3`, then the previous object stored in `f` is erased and `x^3` is put in its place.  This won't change anything you've done previously, but anytime `f` is evaluated later.  

Other things of interest about variables:

* There is a variable browser on the left sidepane of Maple.  
 **SHOW IMAGE**

    The browser lists all of the variables that Maple currently knows as well as the value of the variable.  You can do ....

* to view the value of a variable you can just type the name of the variable and hit return.  If the variable has not be define yet, the variable is just returned. 

* Another way to remove the value of a variable is using the `unassign` command.  For example if `f:=x^2`, then `f` has the value $x^2$.  To remove it, 
    ```
    unassign(`f`)
    ```    
    where backticks are used around the `f`.  The backtick key is in the upper left corner of the keyboard. 



The kernel
---------

Generally for any CAS, the place you type commands into is just a interface to the piece of software that does the hard computing work.  This software is called the kernel.  In fact, it doesn't start up until you first begin entering something in to a document.  

When mentioned that Maple stores variables, in fact, it is the kernel that stores the variables.  It is the kernel that runs all of the commands and then sends the result back to the interface.  

Each tab in Maple is a separate document and thus has a separate kernel.  So the Variable Browser explained above is for a specific document and removing (unassigning) the variable also only pertains to that kernel.  

###How the Kernel works

The kernel in many ways is very simple.  You feed it a command, it does something and returns the result. It has some memory of things entered before it and obviously all of the variables that you store.  It doesn't really know about the spatial location of things in a Maple document.  

(**NEED A BIT MORE???**)




Maple Documents and Order of Entry
------

At the beginning of this course, we saw that the primary way to use Maple was using a Maple Document.  In short a Maple document is a mixture of Maple commands and text with often output from plots.  

As you enter mathematics and commands in Maple, any entry that results in expression or similar output will be given a number.  Recall that to use that output, you can do *Insert->Label* (or CTRL(CMD)-L), type in the number and voila, you have that output without assigning it to a variable.  This is useful in not having to retype much.  



###Sections in Maple Documents

Another way to organize your Maple document is to use sections and subsection.  To create a section, go to *Insert->Section* and you can give the section a name.  If this is named "Section One", then it will look like the following:

**INSERT IMAGE**

You can collapse and open sections by clicking on the section name.  


What is a command?
------

As mentioned above, many things that you do in Maple is a command. The commands that we've seen so far include

* expand
* simplify
* plot

Recall that a command has the form:

```
name(arg1,arg2,...,opt1=value1,opt2=value2,...)
```
and an explanation of the following is:

* `name` is the name of the command. 
* Immediately after the name is a `(` and don't put a space before it or you will try to multiply things.   
* The things `arg1,arg2,...` are called the arguments (or parameters) of the function.  For example, if plotting `arg1` is the expression that you wish to plot. 
* the rest of it are called options.  The are separated by commas and have the form `opt=value`, where `opt` is the name of the option and `value` is the value of it.   For example, in a plot command, we saw the option `style=line`, which creates a line plot.  





Reading the Help in Maple
-----

Reading the help pages will get you a long ways in Maple.  Most help pages (Maple included) are pretty dull reading, if you can get a sense of how to read them, it will benefit you in the long-term.  

To open the help pages, go to *Help->Help Manual* in Maple (or type CONTROL(CMD)-F1 ) and you will see:


The easiest way to use the help manual is to search on a term.  Let's look at the help page of something that we have seen already, the `expand` command.  Search for this in the Help page and you should see:



First of all, this help page is similar to many standard Maple Help pages.  They include:

* **Name**: this gives the name and whether it is in a library.  If the name is in the form **XXX[yyyy]** then the name of the command is yyyy and it is in library XXX.  We will cover this later. 
* **Calling Sequence**: this explains briefly what to type into the command to get it to run. 
* **Parameters**: the arguments and options that can go into the command (briefly)
* **Description**: this describes the command in detail.  It often will contain links to other help pages and subpages.  There is often a lot of this that you may not understand.  Roll with it or ask your instructor.  
* **Examples**: this is a list of examples.  Generally, you can type the example in directly (or copy-paste them) 

###Exercises

Look up the expand command in the help browser and answer the following questions:
1.  What does the expand command do? 
2. How many required arguments are needed?  Describe all of the required arguments.
3. What are the options of the command.  Describe what they do. 
4. Expand the expression: $$\cos(x+y)$$ 
5. How would you expand the expression $$(x+y)^2 + \sin(a-b)$$ to get $$x^2+2xy+y^2+\sin(a-b)?$$





Lists in Maple
-----

Often we want to do something to a number of numbers or expressions.  The best example that we have seen so far is that of plotting multiple expressions on the same axes.  Recall that we may want to plot $x, x^2, x^3$ on the same axes.  If we enter
```
plot([x,x^2,x^3],x=-2..2,legend=[x,x^2,x^3])
```
then we get such a plot. 

The three functions are entered as a list: `[x,x^2,x^3]`, which is just a matching pair of square brackets `[]` which each object separated by a  comma. 

Another example would be to have the first 10 counting numbers:
```
[1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]
```
or you can mix numbers and expression like
```
[3/4,x^2,sin(x),-100.34,5!,pi]
```

###The seq command

If there is a nice pattern in your list, the `seq` command will usually be better to use than typing out the list directly.  The `seq` command will apply a function to subset of integers.  For example,
```
seq(i,i=1..10)
```
will produce the list `[1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]`.  Notice that there is no `i` in the result, so it doesn't matter what variable you use in the `seq` command.  If you typed `seq(n,n=1..10)`, you would get the same result.  

To find the first 10, even numbers, try
```
seq(2n,n=1..10)
```



###Exercise

1. Take a look at the `seq` command in the help browser.
2. Create the list `[1,4,7,10,13,16,19,...,52]` 
3. Use the seq command to create the list $[x,x^2,x^3,x^4,x^5]$. 
4. Use the seq command to find 0! through 10!

The Map command
-----

If you need to repeat the same function applied to a number of parameters, often the `map` function is what you need to use.  In general, the `map` command takes a function and a list and returns a list in which the function is applied to each element of the list. Here are a number of examples. 

If 
```
nums:=seq(i,i=1..10)
```
and `f:=x->x^2` (the square function), then 
```
map(f,nums)
```
will return the square of each integer.  

Notice that in the command above, we had to define `f` before typing `map(f,nums)`, however, if we insert the function inside the map command, it will save a step. Try
```
map(x->x^2,nums)
```


Recall that earlier, you were asked to expand the binomial $(x+1)^n$ for various values of $n$. (I think, $n=2,3,4,5$ and 10).  Here's a short way to do that
```
map(n->expand((x+1)^n),[2,3,4,5,10])
```



###Exercise

1. Start with the `nums` list as shown above, find the cube of each number in nums. 
2. 



Loading a Library
------

Many software packages today have so much functionality that not everything can be preloaded (or built-in) when opening the software.  Maple is such an example.  There is a lot of functionality that exists in what are called libraries or packages.  Maple has a few hundred of these and to get a scope of things if you open the Help Browser in Maple and click open the "Mathematics" section, then "Packages", you'll see quite a few related only to mathematics.  

For example, consider the **ScientificConstants** package.  This has a list of a number of important scientific constants that one might need.  To load the package type
```
with(ScientificConstants)
```

and you will see a list of commands that have been loaded with the package.  Often, you don't care about seeing the list, so you can add a : to the end of the list to suppress the output. 

Notice that one of the commands is called `GetConstant`.  

###Exercise

1. Read the help page about `GetConstant`
2. Type `GetConstant(g)`.   What does it tell you?
3. Find the constant that has the mass of the earth.  What is it and what are its units? 

We will often use a Maple library in this course and typically as you go further in mathematics, if you use Maple, the necessary commands will be in a library.  You can also define your own library, which will have information later in these notes how to do this. 


The Assume command (DO THIS LATER?)
-------

Remember that if you use a 