Advanced Computing Techniques in a Computer Algebra System
==================

The following are number of advanced techniques in Maple.  Again, these are general ideas that appear in any CAS, but the format will be specific to Maple.  These allow a user of Maple to create more complicated series of mathematical steps in a nice way. The following techniques are described here:

* *procedures*  These are similar to functions that we saw earlier, but allow more complicated steps to occur. 
* *boolean values*  A boolean is something that is either true or false.  
* *if and while statements*  An if statement allows a few statements of code to branch depending on some condition.  A while statements allows for a few statements of code to continue to run until a condition occurs. 
* *loops*  A loop is a few statements of code that is run generally a fixed number of times. 
* *recursion*  Recursion is a type of procedure that allows code to call itself.  Although often you can generate code that duplicates recursive code, it is often clearer to understand and often come directly from mathematical statements. 
* *libraries*  We have used libaries in this class and here we will create a small one. 

Procedures
-------

A procedure is very similar to a function in any computer language.  In Maple, these are similar in that there is a input (or a number of inputs) and the result is some output (numbers, a plot, an expression).  In fact, all commands in Maple are just procedures. 

Recall that if we have a simple function that returns the square of a number, we can write that as
```
f:=x->x^2
```

We can also define a procedure in a similar manner. 
```
F:=proc(x::numeric)::numeric;
return x^2:
end proc:
```

A few things to note with this

* This is much more complex to write out than the equivalent function.  
* A procedure allow more complicated structures as we will see. 
* You can call this in the same way, $F(2),F(-2)$ for example. 
* The types of input is defined for us (these are options).  We can only use this to square numbers (integers, decimals, etc.)
* You will notice an error if you do $F(x+1)$.  

We can use this procedure to square numbers, but not expressions.  

Let's also examine a similar procedure that adds numbers:
``` 
add:=proc(x::numeric,y::numeric)::numeric;
return x+y:
end proc:
```

###Exercises

1. remove the semicolon and colon off the end of the lines of the procedure, reenter it and see what happens.  Can you understand what is going on?
2. Write a procedure called `mult` that multiplies two numbers and returns the product. 
3. Write a procedure called `average` that returns the average of three numbers. 

Boolean values, if and while statments
------


Loops
-----

Recursion
-----

Creating a Library
-----


Troubleshooting
-------