Integral Calculus in a Computer Algebra System
===========

Antiderivatives
-------

Naturally, Maple and most CAS find antiderviatives.  There are a few ways to do this.  If we want the antiderivative of a function like $x^2$, then we can type:
```
int(x^2,x)
```

which returns $$\frac{x^3}{3}$$.  And note that Maple does not return an integration constant.  

Additionally, we can make the command look like an integral, by typing `int`, then hitting escape and selecting the proper integration.  Lastly, you can use palette as well.  

Maple has many standard integration techniques (subsitution, trig substitution, by parts, among others).  For example, integrating:
$${\frac {x\cos \left( \sqrt {{x}^{2}+1} \right) }{\sqrt {{x}^{2}+1}}}$$
results in $sin(\sqrt{x^2+1})$  (where subsitution has been used).

Another example is the antiderivative of $x^7{\rm e}^{2x}$ which results in 
$$\frac{1}{16} \left( 8\,{x}^{7}-28\,{x}^{6}+84\,{x}^{5}-210\,{x}^{4}+420\,{x}
^{3}-630\,{x}^{2}+630\,x-315 \right) {{\rm e}^{2\,x}}$$
in which the integration by parts formula has been applied 7 times.  

Other times, you might get strange results.  If we find the antiderivative of ${\rm e}^{x^2}$, Maple returns
$$\frac{1}{2}\sqrt {\pi }\, {\rm erfi}\left( x \right) $$

What is this erfi ?   Take a look in the Help Browser. 

Quite amazingly, very few functions have a nice antiderivative, where nice means that you can write the result as a algebraic combination of functions that we know from Precalc and Calculus.  Instead, functions, like erfi (otherwise known as the error function), are defined as solutions to a differential equation or as an antiderivative.  Here's a list of a few

* $\displaystyle\int \frac{\sin x}{x} \, dx$
* $\displaystyle\int \cos(x^2)\, dx$ 
* $\displaystyle\int \frac{1}{\sqrt{1-\sin^2 \theta }} \, d\theta$

Definite Integrals
------

Maple will also find definite integrals and there are a few ways to enter those.  To enter $\displaystyle \int_0^1 x^2 \, dx$, type
```
int(x^2,x=0..1)
```

and it will return $\frac{1}{3}$.  You can also type `int`, hit ESC and select the definite integral (the one with the limits on the integral sign). 

###Exercise

Try the following:

* $\displaystyle \int_0^{\pi/2} \sin x \, dx$
* $\displaystyle \int_{-1}^2 {\rm e}^{2x} \, dx$ 
* $\displaystyle \int_0^{1} \tan^{-1} x \, dx$. 



###Definite Integrals with infinite bounds

You can also do definite integrals with infinite bounds.  For example
$$\int_0^{\infty} {\rm e}^{-x} \,dx$$
returns 1.  

Let's recall what this means.  If you have any integral with an infinite limit, and if $F(x)$ is an antiderivative of $f(x)$, then 
$$\int_a^{\infty} f(x) \, dx = \lim_{b \rightarrow \infty} F(b)-F(a)$$

And we can let Maple help us understand this. For example using the example of $\int_0^{\infty} {\rm e}^{-x} \, dx$ above, the antiderivative of ${\rm e}^{-x}$ is $-{\rm e}^{-x}$ and let's define this to be $F$ using
```
F:=x->-e^(-x)
```

Then we take the limit of $F(b)-F(0)$ 
```
limit(F(b)-F(0), b = infinity)
```

returns 1. { 

###Exercise

Find the following:

* $\displaystyle \int_1^{\infty} \frac{1}{x} \, dx$
* $\displaystyle \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} {\rm e}^{-x^2} \, dx$ 
* The area between the line $x=1$, the curve $y=1/x^2$ and the $x$-axis.  


Differential Equations
-------

Recall that a differential equation is an equation containing derivatives.  A simple example is 
$$\frac{dy}{dx} = y$$

The field of differential equations is extremely important and differential equations appears in all areas of mathematics as well as nearly every science and technology field.  

To solve the differential equation above we typically use the technique of *separation of variables* in that we write all of the $y$ terms on the left and the $x$ terms on the right.  We can rearrange the one above to the following:
$$\frac{1}{y} \, dy = dx \qquad \qquad (1)$$ 

and then we integrate.  Doing this (perhaps with Maple's help), we get
$$\ln(y) = x$$
and then often we want to solve for $y$, which (again with Maple's help) we get:
$$y = {\rm e}^x$$

and this makes sense because this function is its own derivative.  (which is how you can interpret $y'=y$). 

Now, we're missing some functions because we ignored the integration constant above.  To do a little better job, if we include the integration constant when integrating equation (1) above, then 
$$\int \frac{1}{y} \, dy = \int dx$$

will give
$$\ln(y) + C_1 = x + C_2$$
(again, we need to put in the constants since Maple won't do this for us).  We can combine the two constants on the right side and call these $C$ or 
$$\ln(y) = x + C$$
and solving for $y$ result in 
$$y= {\rm e}^{x+C}$$

We can do this all in one shot in Maple, by entering
```
solve(int(1/y,y)=int(1,x)+C,y)
```

###Solving a differential equation using `dsolve`

Lastly, we can let Maple solve the differential equation itself.  If we type
```
dsolve(y'(x)=y(x))
```

then Maple we return
$$y(x) = \_C1 {\rm e}^x$$

which is the same as above because ${\rm e}^{x+C}={\rm e}^x {\rm e}^C$ and then Maple using the constant $\_C1={\rm e}^C$.  

Note: when entering a differential equation, you need to explicitly put in the dependent variable.  So instead of writing $y'=y$, you need to say $y'(x)=y(x)$.  

###Exercise

Solve the following differential equation
$$y'=-\frac{x}{y}$$

1. First, by using separation of variables and going through all of the steps.  Make sure that you include the integration constant.

2. Using `dsolve`.

3. Next find the function that satisfies the differential equation with $y(3)=4$.   


Applications of Integrals
-------

Numerical Integration
-------