 Chapter 11: Linear Algebra
===========

[Return to all notes](index.html)


Linear Algebra in a huge field of mathematics and many standard operations in linear algebra is done in Maple or other CAS software. The core of Linear Algebra is a matrix, a rectangular grid of numbers.  

Linear Algebra library
-------

The Linear Algebra library has many more commands that can be used.  To load it type
```
with(LinearAlgebra):
```

and take a look at the help page for it:
```
?LinearAlgebra
```

Vectors
-----

There are two standard types of Vectors, column vectors and row vectors and Maple has both.  If you want to enter the vector
$$\left[\begin{array}{c} 4 \newline -2 \newline 3 \end{array} \right]$$

you can type:
```
v:=Vector([4,-2,3])
```

and let's say that you have a vector
```
w:=Vector([2,0,3])
```

which will be another column vector.   If you want a row vector, like
$$ \left[\begin{array}{c} 1 & 2 & 3 \end{array}\right]$$
you can enter this as
```
Vector[row]([1,2,3])
```

Check out other ways to create a vector using `?Vector`

###Dot and Cross Products

You can take the dot product of two column vectors of the same length with the command `DotProduct`, which is part of the `LinearAlgebra` library.  For example
```
DotProduct(v,w)
```

returns 17.  

and to find the cross product, try
```
CrossProduct(v,w)
```

which returns the vector
$$\left[\begin{array}{c} -6 \newline -6 \newline 4 \end{array}\right]$$




Matrices
-----

To enter a matrix in Maple, it is entered row by row. Consider the matrix:
$$A=\left[\begin{array}{cccc} 1 & 2 & 3 & 4 \newline 5 & 6 & 7 & 8 \newline 9 & 10 & 11 & 12 \end{array} \right]$$
you can enter this as
```
A:=Matrix([[1,2,3,4],[5,6,7,8],[9,10,11,12]])
```

or you can use the Matrix palette.  Enter the number of rows as 3 and columns as 4 and leave the Type as *Custom Values* and Maple will insert a generic 3 by 4 matrix.  You can tab to get to each of the elements of the matrix.  

Let's also define the matrix $B$ to be a 3 by 4 matrix of all ones, which can be done with
```
B:=Matrix(3,4,fill=1)
```

and this will look like:
$$\left[\begin{array}{cccc} 1 & 1 & 1 & 1 \newline 1 & 1 & 1 & 1 \newline 1 & 1 & 1 & 1 \end{array} \right]$$


And a 3 by 3 matrix with the numbers 2, $-1$ and 4 on the diagonal,
```
C:=DiagonalMatrix([2,-1,4],3,3)
```

and this will look like
$$\left[\begin{array}{cccc} 2 & 0 & 0  \newline 0 & -1 & 0 \newline 0 & 0 & 4 \end{array} \right]$$

###Adding and Subtracting Matrices

We can add the matrices $A$ and $B$ because they are the same size and can using standard notation:
```
A+B
```

which will return:
$$\left[\begin{array}{cccc}  2 & 3 & 4 & 5 \newline  6 & 7 & 8 & 9 \newline 10 & 11 & 12 & 13 \end{array} \right]$$

and if we subtract
```
A-B
```

Maple returns
$$\left[\begin{array}{cccc} 0 & 1 & 2 & 3 \newline 4 & 5 & 6 & 7 \newline 8 & 9 & 10 & 11  \end{array} \right]$$


If we try to add $A$ and $C$, we get the error:
```
Error, (in rtable/Sum) invalid input: dimensions do not match: Matrix(1 .. 3, 1 .. 4) cannot be added to Matrix(1 .. 3, 1 .. 3)
```

this is because the two matrices are not the same size.  

###Scalar multiplication

Recall that Scalar multiplication of either a vector or a matrix results in a vector a matrix that is the product of the scalar and each element of the vector or matrix.  For example, $3v$ for the vector $v$ above is
$$\left[\begin{array}{c} 12 \newline -6 \newline 9\end{array}\right]$$
and $-2A$ is

$$\left[ \begin {array}{cccc} -2&-4&-6&-8\newline -10&-12&-
14&-16\newline-18&-20&-22&-24\end {array} \right]$$

###Multiplying Matrices

Recall that two multiply 2 matrices, the number of columns of the first matrix must equal the number of rows of the second matrix.  For example if we have the matrix
```
P:=Matrix([[3,2,0],[1,-2,4],[0,2,5]])
```

If we multiply $P$ and $A$, we use Maple's dot notation or $P.A$ to get

$$\left[ \begin {array}{cccc} 13&18&23&28\newline 27&30&33&
36\newline 55&62&69&76\end {array} \right]$$


We can also use the dot notation to multiply matrices and vectors.  For example, $P.v$ is

$$\left[\begin{array}{c} 8\newline20\newline11\end{array}\right]$$

If we don't have compatibly-sized matrices, for example, $A$ and $B$, and try $A.B$, we get:
```
Error, (in LinearAlgebra:-Multiply) first matrix column dimension (4) <> second matrix row dimension (3)
```

###Exercise

Let

$$A=\left[\begin{array}{cc} 1 & 3 \newline -2 & 4 \newline 5 & 0\end{array}\right]$$
$$B=\left[\begin{array}{ccc} 3 & 2 & 3 \newline 0 & 2 & 0 \newline -1 &4 & -1 \end{array}\right]$$
$$C=\left[\begin{array}{cc} 0 &4 \newline -2 & 1 \end{array}\right]$$
$$\vec{v} = \left[\begin{array}{c} 4 \newline 2 \end{array}\right]$$
$$\vec{u} = \left[\begin{array}{c} 0 \newline 5 \newline -2 \end{array}\right]$$


Find the following or state the operation is not compatible.

1. $AB$
2. $AC$
3. $BC$
4. $A^{T}B$
5. $A\vec{v}$
6. $A\vec{u}$
7. $B\vec{u}$.  

Idenity Matrix
--------

A square matrix with all zeros except 1's on the diagonal, is called an *identity matrix*.  The identity matrices of size 2 by 2, 3 by 3 and 4 by 4 are

$$\begin{array}{ccc}
\left[\begin{array}{cc}1&0\newline0&1\end{array}\right]&\left[\begin{array}{ccc}1&0&0\newline0&1&0\newline0&0&1\end{array}\right]&
\left[\begin{array}{cccc}1&0&0&0\newline0&1&0&0\newline0&0&1&0\newline0&0&0&1\end{array}\right]\end{array}$$

An identity matrix has the property that if you mulitply a matrix or a vector by the identity matrix, the matrix or vector is returned.  More particularly,
$$\begin{array}{cccc}IA=A & AI=A & I\vec{v}=\vec{v} & \vec{v}I=\vec{v}\end{array}$$

To get an Identity matrix in Maple, use the `IdentityMatrix` command. For example
```
IdentityMatrix(3)
```

returns a 3 by 3 identity matrix.

###Exercise

Using the vector $\vec{v}$ and matrix $A$ above, find

1. $I\vec{v}$
2. $\vec{v}I$
3. $IA$
4. $AI$.

and show that you get the vector or matrix back. Make sure that you use the identity matrix of the correct size.  


Matrix Transpose
-------

Recall that the transpose of a matrix is a new matrix where the rows of the tranpose are the columns of the original matrix.  For example,

$$A^{T} = \left[\begin{array}{ccc} 1 & 5 & 9 \newline 2 & 6 & 10 \newline 3 & 7 & 11 \newline 4 & 8 & 12 \end{array}\right]$$

This can be done in Maple using the `Tranpose` command:
```
Transpose(A)
```

returns the matrix above.   (Note: Transpose is in the `LinearAlgebra` package so make sure that it is loaded.)

Gaussian Elimination
--------

One of the first concepts in linear algebra is how to solve linear systems.  For example,
$$\begin{array}{rl} 3x- 2y & = 4 \newline
x + 5y & = 7 \end{array}$$

Maple can solve this by using the `solve` command such as
```
solve([3x-2y=4,x+5y=7])
```

which returns $\{x=2,y=1\}$.  In linear algebra, we find the augmented coefficient matrix as
$$\left[\begin{array}{ccc} 3 & -2 & 4 \newline 1 & 5 & 7 \end{array}\right]$$

One method is to use row operations on the matix to reduce the matrix to a more useful form.  One of these is called *Gaussian Elimination*.  If we define the matrix above by $A$, then in Maple,
```
GaussianElimination(A)
```

returns $$ \left[ \begin {array}{ccc} 3&-2&4\newline
0&17/3&17/3\end {array} \right]$$

To find the solution, we can use *back substitution*

The last row can be written back in equation form as
$$\frac{17}{3} y = \frac{17}{3}$$  
or $y=1$.  Then writting the first equation:
$$3x-2y=4$$
or substituting in $y=1$
$$\begin{array}{rl}3x-2(1)& =4\newline
3x& = 6 \newline
x & = 2\end{array}$$


Reduced Row Echelon Form
--------

Maple can help us even more.  If we type:
```
ReducedRowEchelonForm(A)
```

This returns:
$$\left[\begin{array}{ccc}1 & 0 & 2\newline0 &1 &1\end{array}\right]$$
and this can be written as the two equations $x=2$, $y=1$, same as above.

###Exercise

The linear system
$$\begin{array}{rl}-3x+4y-5z & = 8\newline
-4x-2y-z & = 0 \newline
5x-4y+3z & = -16\end{array}$$
can be written as an Augmented Coefficient Matrix:
$$\left[\begin{array}{cccc}-3 & 4 & -5 & 8\newline
-4&-2&-1&0\newline5&-4&3&-16\end{array}\right]$$

Use `ReducedRowEchelonForm` to reduce the matrix and then write the solution.

Determinants
-------

The [determinant of a matrix](http://www.mathsisfun.com/algebra/matrix-determinant.html) is helpful in many different matrix applications including determining if the matrix is singular and it can be used in solving linear systems using [Cramer's Rule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cramer%27s_rule).

The determinant is applied only to square matrices and is denoted ${\rm det}(A)$ or $|A|$.  If the matrix is a 2 by 2, then
$$\left|\begin{array}{cc} a & b \newline c & d \end{array} \right|=ad-bc$$

When finding a determinant, often Laplace's Expansion method or row operations are used to find the value.  For example

$$\left|\begin {array}{ccc} 2&-3&1\newline 3&3&0\newline2&3&-3\end {array} \right|=2\left|\begin{array}{cc}3&0\newline3&-3\end{array}\right|-(-3)\left|\begin{array}{cc}3&0\newline2&-3\end{array}\right|+1\left|\begin{array}{cc}3&3\newline2&3\end{array}\right|$$

$$\begin{array}{rl}&=2\left((3)(-3)-(3)(0)\right)+3\left((3)(-3)-2(0)\right)+\left((3)(3)-2(3)\right)\newline
&=2(-9)+3(-9)+(9-6)=-42\end{array}$$

And using Maple on the 3 by 3 matrix $A$ above  (again this in the `LinearAlgebra` library)
```
Determinant(A)
```

returns $-42$ as well.

Matrix Inverse
---------

If a matrix, $A$ is square and it's determiant is not zero, then there exists a matrix called the *inverse* and denoted with the property $AA^{-1}=I$,

One way to find the matrix inverse of $A$ is write the matrix augmented with the identity matrix and then put it in Reduced Row echelon form.

For example, consider the matrix

$$A=\left[\begin{array}{ccc}-3&4&-5\newline-4&-2&-1\newline5&-4&3\end{array}\right]$$
then we write the augmented matrix where the 3 by 3 identity matrix is append on the right side.  We can to this using the command:
```
Aug:=Matrix([A,IdentityMatrix(3)])
```

which returns $$\left[\begin{array}{ccc}-3&4&-5&1&0&0\newline-4&-2&-1&0&1&0\newline5&-4&3&0&0&1\end{array}\right]$$

and using the `ReducedRowEchelonForm` command, we get:

$$\left[ \begin {array}{cccccc} 1&0&0&{\frac {5}{36}}&-\frac{1}{9}&{\frac {7}{
36}}\newline 0&1&0&-{\frac {7}{72}}&-\frac{2}{9}&-{\frac {17}{72}}
\newline 0&0&1&-{\frac {13}{36}}&-\frac{1}{9}&-{\frac {11}{36}}
\end {array} \right] $$

and the right half of the matrix is the inverse or
$$A^{-1}=\left[ \begin {array}{ccc} {\frac {5}{36}}&-\frac{1}{9}&{\frac {7}{
36}}\newline -{\frac {7}{72}}&-\frac{2}{9}&-{\frac {17}{72}}
\newline -{\frac {13}{36}}&-\frac{1}{9}&-{\frac {11}{36}}
\end {array} \right]$$


We can also get the same result from the command `MatrixInverse`:
```
MatrixInverse(A)
```

returns the same matrix above.  

###Exercise

1. Find the inverse of
    $$C=\left[ \begin {array}{ccc} -1&-3&0\newline-3&2&-1\newline1&-3&0\end {array} \right]$$
    using the augmented matrix with the identity matrix.
2. Find the inverse of $C$ using the command `MatrixInverse`
3. What happens when you try to find the inverse of $$\left[ \begin {array}{ccc} -1&-3&0\newline-3&2&-1\newline2&-5&1\end{array}\right]?$$




###Using the Matrix Inverse to solve a linear system.

Above we saw the linear system:

The linear system
$$\begin{array}{rl}-3x+4y-5z & = 8\newline
-4x-2y-z & = 0 \newline
5x-4y+3z & = -16\end{array}$$

and used the Augumented Matrix to find the solution.  Instead, we can write:
$$\begin{array}{rl}A=\left[ \begin {array}{ccc} -3&4&-5\newline-4&-2&-1
\newline5&-4&3\end {array} \right]&\vec{b}=\left[\begin{array}{c}8\newline0\newline-16\end{array}\right]\end{array}$$

and then if we write the vector
$$\vec{x}=\left[\begin{array}{c}x\newline y\newline z\end{array}\right]$$, then the linear system can be written as $A\vec{x}=\vec{b}$. We can solve this in the following way.
$$A\vec{x}=\vec{b}$$
Multiply the equation by $A^{-1}$
$$\begin{array}{rl}A^{-1}A\vec{x}&=A^{-1}\vec{b}\newline
\text{since $A^{-1}A=I\qquad\qquad$}&\newline
I\vec{x}&=A^{-1}\vec{b}\newline
\text{since $I\vec{x}=\vec{x}\qquad\qquad$}&\newline
\vec{x}&=A^{-1}\vec{b}\end{array}$$

Use this to solve the linear system above.

First, we will find $A^{-1}$ using the `MatrixInverse` command:
```
Ainv:=MatrixInverse(A)
```

which returns
$$\left[ \begin {array}{ccc} {\frac {5}{36}}&-\frac{1}{9}&{\frac {7}{
36}}\newline -{\frac {7}{72}}&-\frac{2}{9}&-{\frac {17}{72}}
\newline -{\frac {13}{36}}&-\frac{1}{9}&-{\frac {11}{36}}
\end {array} \right]$$
as we saw above.  

Lastly, we multiply $A^{-1}$ and $\vec{b}$
```
Ainv.b
```

to get:
$$\left[\begin{array}{c}-2\newline3\newline2\end{array}\right]$$

so the result is $x=-2,y=3,z=2$, the same as we found above.  

Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors
--------

Another important topic in Linear Algebra is that of eigenvalues and eigenvectors.  Recall that a scalar (number) $\lambda$ is an eigenvalue of a square matrix $A$ with corresponding eigenvector $\vec{v}$ if this satisfies the equation
$$A\vec{v}=\lambda\vec{v}.$$
Finding $\lambda$ and $\vec{v}$ that satisfy this require two steps:

1. The eigenvalues can be found by solving
    $$|A-\lambda I|=0$$where the vertical lines is the determinant of the matrix.  

2. For each eigenvalue, you seek for a vector $\vec{v}$ such that
    $$(A-I\lambda)\vec{v}=\vec{0}$$

###Example

Find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the matrix
$$A=\left[\begin{array}{cc}4&-1\newline-2&3\end{array}\right]$$

Step 1:  Solve $|A-\lambda I|=0$

```
Determinant(A-lambda*IdentityMatrix(2))=0
```

returns $\lambda^{2}-7\lambda+10=0$.  This equation is called the *characteristic equation* of the matrix $A$.  And then
```
solve(#)
```

where (#) is the line number of the equation, Maple returns $5,2$.  There are two eigenvalues for this.  Note: the maximum number of eigenvalues for an $n$ by $n$ matrix is $n$.  

Step 2: For each of the eigenvalues, solve $(A-\lambda I)\vec{v}=0$.  First, consider $\lambda=5$

```
A-5*IdentityMatrix(2)
```

return the matrix: $$\left[\begin{array}{cc}-1&-1\newline-2&-2\end{array}\right]$$.
To solve this we will append the zero vector on the right or
```
Aug:=Matrix([A-5*IdentityMatrix(2),Vector([0,0])])
```
which returns $$\left[\begin{array}{ccc}-1&-1&0\newline-2&-2&0\end{array}\right]$$
and then
```
ReducedRowEchelonForm(Aug)
```

which returns $$\left[\begin{array}{ccc}1&1&0\newline0&0&0\end{array}\right]$$

The first row of the equation, means that $x+y=0$.  We seek any nonzero solution to this, if $y=-1$ and $x=1$, then the vector is
$$\vec{v}_1=\left[\begin{array}{c}1\newline-1\end{array}\right]$$.

Next, find the eigenvector with eigenvalue $\lambda=2$.  
```
Aug:=Matrix([A-2*IdentityMatrix(2),Vector([0,0])])
```

returns $$\left[\begin{array}{ccc} 2&-1&0\newline -2&1&0\end{array} \right]$$

and putting in reduced row echelon form:
$$\left[\begin{array}{ccc} 2&-1&0\newline 0&0&0\end{array} \right]$$

Lastly, we find the eigenvector associated with this.  The first row is $2x-y=0$ and we seek a nonzero solution to this.  Let $x=1$, then $y=2$ and the vector will be
$$\vec{v}_2=\left[\begin{array}{c}1\newline2\end{array}\right]$$


In summary for the matrix
$$A=\left[\begin{array}{cc}4&-1\newline-2&3\end{array}\right]$$

The eigenvalues are 5 and 2 and the associated eigenvectors are
$$\begin{array}{rl}\vec{v}\_1=\left[\begin{array}{c}1\newline-1\end{array}\right]& \vec{v}\_2=\left[\begin{array}{c}1\newline2\end{array}\right]\end{array}$$

###Exercise

Use the steps above to find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of
$$A=\left[\begin{array}{cc}6&2\newline4&4\end{array}\right]$$


###More Built-in commands for Maple

Recall that above, the first step in finding the eigenvalues of the matrix is to write down the characteristic equation of the matrix or $|A-\lambda I|=0$.  If we return to the matrix above,
$$A=\left[\begin{array}{cc}4&-1\newline-2&3\end{array}\right]$$
we can use Maple to find the characteristic equation by
```
CharacteristicPolynomial(A,lambda)=0
```

which returns as above, $\lambda^{2}-7\lambda+10=0$, which we can solve with the `solve` command to get $5,2$.  

Then the next step was to solve $(A-\lambda I)\vec{v}$ for the given values of $\lambda$.  Another name for this is the null space of the matrix.  If we enter
```
NullSpace(A-5*IdentityMatrix(2))
```

Maple returns
$$\left\\{ \left[\begin{array}{c}-1\newline 1\end{array}\right] \right\\}$$

so the only vector in the null space is the one above.  This is just $-1$ times the eigenvector that we found above.  (Note: there is a theorem that says that any nonzero scalar times an eigenvector is also an eigenvector.  In other words, eigenvectors are not unique.)

If we type:
```
NullSpace(A-2*IdentityMatrix(2))
```

Maple returns
$$\left\\{\left[\begin{array}{c}1/2\newline1\end{array}\right]\right\\}$$

which is $1/2$ times the eigenvector that we found.

###Exercise

Use the `CharacteristicPolynomial` and `NullSpace` commands to find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of
$$A=\left[\begin{array}{cc}6&2\newline4&4\end{array}\right]$$

that found above.


###Maple can find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors in one shot!!!

Of course, Maple can just find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors  as well.

Returning to the matrix:$$A=\left[\begin{array}{cc}4&-1\newline -2&3\end{array}\right]$$
type
```
Eigenvalues(A)
```

and one gets:
$$\left[\begin{array}{c}5\newline2\end{array}\right]$$

Note:  this is not a vector, but the two eigenvectors are just 5 and 2 as we saw above.  

To find the eigenvectors, type
```
Eigenvectors(A)
```

and you get:
$$\left[\begin{array}{c}5\newline2\end{array}\right],\left[\begin{array}{cc}\frac{1}{2} & -1\newline1&1\end{array}\right]$$


The first vector is the eigenvalues again and the matrix contain the eigenvectors as column vectors.  Note: these are the same eigenvectors that we found using the `NullSpace` command.  
